---
title: "Safely transferring large amounts of data using rsync"
sub_title: "A quick how-to on remote data tranfers for bioinformaticians"
categories:
  - Bioinformatics
elements:
  - file
  - data management
  - rsync
  - screen
  - find
---
 
A procedure that I've done practically every day since starting graduate school was to transfer large files and directories between computers. Often, it's not as simple as running the exact same command each time, and there are slight modifications needed to make sure I transfer only what I want to. But the fundamentals are very simple, and are the same for 95% of what I need to do. Here, I'll explain how to use `screen`, `rsync` and `find` to make sure that files and directories get transferred reliably and efficiently each time.

<br>


## Dependancies

If you're primarly working on a Mac or Linux machine, the `find` utility is probably already installed. If `screen` or `rsync` are not, they can be easily installed:

```shell
sudo apt update

sudo apt install screen rsync
```

<br>

## Setting up a screen session

`screen` is a utility that lets you run multiple independant commands from a single terminal session. These commands will continue to run as long as the screen is active. Say you're running running a command in a screen set up on a remote computer from your laptop at home. You could then throw your laptop out the window, and the command will still run on the remote computer with no issues.

We want to set up large jobs, such as file transfers, inside a `screen` session because might take hours or days. We don't want any interruptions to occur, because that can cause file corruption that becomes annoying to deal with. Setting up and managing screens is relatively easy, and only requires a few keystrokes to remember:

#### Listing active screens
```shell
screen -ls # this will list any active screens, and whether you are attached or detached to those screens
```

#### Creating a screen session (this will automatically enter the screen session)
```shell
screen -S name_of_screen
```

#### Detaching from a screen
<kbd>Control + A + D</kbd>

#### Reattaching to a screen
```shell
screen -r name_of_screen
```

And that's it! Memorize these few commands (which will become 2nd nature very soon) and you're good to go.

<br>

## rsync basics

`rsync` is a great file transfer 